---
layout: post
title: 'Static analysis of expl3 programs (5): Frank Mittelbach in Brno, the first public release of explcheck, and expl3 usage statistics'
tags:
  - expl3
  - LaTeX
  - programming
  - devlog
date: 2024-12-05
excerpt_separator: <!-- more -->
---

This week has been an exciting one for the TeX and LaTeX community in Brno,
with Frank Mittelbach, a key figure from the LaTeX team, visiting Masaryk
University to deliver talks on the history and the future of LaTeX.

Alongside his visit, I introduced _explcheck_, a static analysis tool for the
expl3 programming language, with its first public release now available on
CTAN.

As part of my seminar talk, I demonstrated explcheck's capabilities, including
a deep dive into 11 years of expl3 usage statistics, which reveal intriguing
trends about its adoption and integration into the TeX ecosystem.

<!-- more -->

# Frank Mittelbach in Brno

This week, Frank Mittelbach from the LaTeX team visited my alma mater, the
Faculty of Informatics at the Masaryk University in Brno, which is home to
a vibrant community of TeX users and where [Hàn Thế Thành studied and developed
pdfTeX during 1991–2001][2].

During his visit, Frank gave two talks, [one on Monday][3], where he addressed
the students of an undergraduate course about electronic document preparation,
and [another one on Tuesday][4], where he also addressed the faculty members
and the general public.

Before heading back to his hometown of Mainz earlier today, Frank also visited
[Petr Sojka's seminar on digital typography][5], where he spoke about his
research into a globally optimized pagination algorithm for LaTeX.

  {% include image.html url="20241205-frank.jpg"
     description="Frank demonstrates his general framework for globally optimized
                  pagination on Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland.
                  (Photo by me)" %}

# The first public release of explcheck

For this special occasion, I prepared [the first public release of
_explcheck_][6], a static analysis tool (so-called *linter*) for the expl3
programming language that [I][8] [have][9] [been][10] [working][11] [on][12]
[recently][13]. I also released explcheck on [the Comprehensive TeX Archive
Network (CTAN)][7] to make it more easily available to early adopters.

On today's seminar, I also gave [an invited talk][1], in which I introduced
explcheck and showed a demo of the first release.

  {% include image.html url="20241205-vitek.jpg"
     description="I discuss with Frank and students why the static analysis of
                  expl3 programs is more feasible than the static analysis of
                  TeX programs in general. (Photo by Petr Sojka)" %}

# Expl3 usage statistics

As a part of my demo, I used explcheck to compute the usage statistics of
expl3 over the past eleven years.

  {% include image.html url="expl3-usage-statistics.png"
     description="The ratio of expl3 files to other TeX files and the percentage
     of expl3 code in expl3 files in the last eleven releases of TeX Live." %}

The proportion of expl3 files within all TeX files has been rising steadily
from 4% in TeX Live 2013 to 9% in TeX Live 2023 and 11% in the current release
of TeX Live 2024. This steady rise demonstrates that expl3 is gaining traction
as a programming language for TeX development, moving beyond its initial niche
to broader adoption across the community.

In contrast, the proportion of expl3 code within expl3 files has steadily
declined, dropping from 94% in TeX Live 2013 to 66% in TeX Live 2023 and
further to 64% in the latest TeX Live 2024 release.  This trend suggests a
significant shift in how expl3 is being adopted. While it was initially used
almost exclusively in dedicated expl3 packages, it is now increasingly
integrated into existing packages originally written in traditional TeX.

 [1]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1vVaUHgROYpAeGlBrxZqpWj8HCZjQGpZYRB0rRGtu3dE/edit "explcheck: a static analyzer of expl3 code"
 [2]: https://www.fi.muni.cz/alumni/gallery/han-the-thanh.html.en "FI MU alumnus Hàn Thế Thành is an author of famous pdfTeX, an extension of the TeX typesetting program"
 [3]: https://video.muni.cz/public/Mittelbach/Mittelbach_1.mp4 "Q&A LaTeX session: The history and development strategy of 35 years of LaTeX development: everything you wanted to know but were afraid to ask"
 [4]: https://video.muni.cz/public/Mittelbach/Mittelbach_2.mp4 "Teaching old docs new tricks"
 [5]: https://is.muni.cz/el/fi/podzim2024/PV212/index.qwarp?prejit=14619360 "PV212: General Framework for Globally Optimized Pagination 5. 12. 2024"
 [6]: https://github.com/Witiko/expltools/releases/tag/2024-12-04
 [7]: https://ctan.org/pkg/expltools "expltools – Development tools for expl3 programmers"
 [8]: /Expl3-Linter-1
 [9]: /Expl3-Linter-2
 [10]: /Expl3-Linter-2.5
 [11]: /Expl3-Linter-3
 [12]: /Expl3-Linter-4
 [13]: /Expl3-Linter-4.5
