---
layout: post
title: "Static analysis of expl3 programs (10): Expltools goes to India"
tags:
  - expl3
  - LaTeX
  - programming
  - devlog
date: 2025-07-22
last_modified_at: 2025-07-22
excerpt_separator: <!-- more -->
---

Yesterday I returned from TUG 2025 in Trivandrum, Kerala (July 18–20, 2025),
where I was thrilled to present [my talk][24] announcing the development of
_expltools_ to the broader TeX community.

In this post, I will try to briefly summarize my experience in the form of a
travel diary while it is still fresh in my mind. I'll concentrate on my own
experiences rather than the full program details. If you'd like to explore the
agenda itself, please consult [the conference program][14] and watch the
YouTube recordings here: [day one, part one][15] and [part two][16], [day
two][17], and [day three][18].

<!-- more -->

# July 16: Getting from Brno to Trivandrum

Early in the morning on July 16, I took a train from Brno to Prague.

  {% include image.html url="20250716_054327.jpg"
     description="Getting up-to-date on the current gaming news with the LEVEL magazine" %}

There, I boarded a flight from Prague to Abu Dhabi and then a connecting flight
to Trivandrum, where I arrived early in the morning of the next day.

After getting to the hotel, I slept until shortly before the noon.

  {% include image.html url="20250717_061518.jpg"
     description="My hotel room at the Hyatt Regency hotel just before taking a rest after the flight" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250717_105906.jpg"
     description="A view of the city from the east-facing window of my hotel room" %}

# July 17: Exploring Trivandrum

This was my first time visiting India. Therefore, after I woke up, I spent the
rest of the day walking around the city.

  {% include image.html url="20250717_135331.jpg"
     description="The Centre for Development of Advanced Computing" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250717_140316.jpg"
     description="The Kanakakunnu Palace" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250717_145607.jpg"
     description="A clock tower at the entrance of University of Kerala" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250717_150815.jpg"
     description="A hindu temple near the Connemara Market" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250717_161523.jpg"
     description="Electrocution waiting to happen" %}

Before returning to the hotel, I grabbed a late dinner at the [FOOD TEXT][3]
restaurant in the Palayam district.

  {% include image.html url="20250717_154253.jpg"
     description="About to order chicken biriani with two chicken wings and rice" %}

The food was delicious and I spend just about 250 ₹ for the meal and a glass of
ginger limeade. In Prague, I can imagine paying 250 Kč for the same meal, so the
pricing seemed intuitive. At the same time, Kč (Czech koruna) currently trades
for about four ₹ (Indian rupees), so the meal was extremely inexpensive from my
vantage point.

I returned to the hotel in the evening and took close to 10 hours of sleep,
still feeling somewhat exhausted from the long flight in addition to today's ca
15 km walk.

# July 18: The first day of the conference

The next day, I woke up early and had a breakfast at the hotel before heading
to the conference room and receiving my welcome package there.

  {% include image.html url="20250720_081332.jpg"
     description="Pazhankanji, a traditional South Indian dish made from leftover rice and water" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250718_094628.jpg"
     description="A welcome package, which also included a book for LaTeX beginners" %}

During a coffee break after the morning session of talks, I introduced myself
to Ben and Mathias from Overleaf. Om Sunday, Mathias was going to give a talk
titled [_Best-effort TeX parsing for interactive editing_][4] ([slides][5]),
which I expected to be the most closely related talk to mine at this
conference.

During the lunch, I introduced myself to Honza Vaněk and Hàn Thế Thành, two out
of four founders of the Czech company [Trivic][6]. Trivic develops proprietary
XML-based systems for copyediting, proofreading, and typesetting manuscripts,
all powered by TeX as the backend. Indian firms such as [STMDocs][7] deploy
these systems to fulfill orders for major publishers like Elsevier. Both Honza
and Thành are alumni of the Masaryk University, like myself.

In the evening, several participants, me included, took a guided bus tour
around the city. We drove almost 40 km, visiting some places that I already saw
yesterday as well as more distant places such as the commercial district of
Pulimoodu, the Sree Padmanabha Swamy Temple, and the coastline.

  {% include image.html url="20250718_193511.jpg"
     description="The commercial district of Pulimoodu" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250718_194855.jpg"
     description="Puthen Kovil Sree Bhagavathy Temple" %}

There was a heavy monsoon rain during the second half of the tour, which made
most participants hide in the lower floor of the bus.

After returning from the tour, I went to bed early, so that I would be fresh
for my morning talk about expltools.

# July 19: The second day of the conference

After a light breakfast, I gave a talk titled [Expltools: Development tools
for expl3 programmers][8] ([slides][9]):

  {% include youtube.html id="ImCoKj_kLw4?start=3025&amp;end=5615"
     description="“TUG 2025 — Day 2 Saturday Stream” at YouTube, my talk starts at 50:25" %}

Despite my stage fright and the initial hiccups with the microphones, I felt
the talk went smoothly. During the Q&amp;A session, the questions asked
confirmed that the audience had a strong understanding of the material that I
covered in my talk.

During the following coffee break, C. V. Radhakrishnan&thinsp;—&thinsp;a
founding member of [the Indian TeX Users Group][10] and current STMDocs
employee&thinsp;—&thinsp;offered to help secure additional funding for
expltools development. This is an encouraging vote of confidence not only in
the tool's usefulness and the success of my presentation!

During lunch, Mathias and I revisited topics from my talk. He showed me [the
grammar their (La)TeX parser used][11], which struck me as more elegant than
expltools' pipeline approach&thinsp;—&thinsp;tokenizing the text first, then
using a rule-based parser to assemble larger structures. I pointed out,
however, that while less elegant, expltools' method is inherently more robust:
it retains partial understanding of complex expl3 code that can't be fully
parsed, and uses this to reduce false positives. That exchange led me to [draft
a paragraph][12] in our work-in-progress paper on expltools to highlight
precisely this advantage.

After lunch, I took to the streets of Trivandrum once more, retracing on foot
some of the sights from yesterday's bus-tour.

  {% include image.html url="20250719_140207.jpg"
     description="The Methan Mani clock tower (left) and the Sree Padmanabha Swamy Temple (right) over the Padmatheertha Pond" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250719_140658.jpg"
     description="A detail of the Methan Mani clock tower" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250719_141740.jpg"
     description="A Mahatma Gandhi statue in the Gandhi Park" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250719_142042.jpg"
     description="The bustling bazaar along the Chalakkambalam Road" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250719_151832.jpg"
     description="Butter chicken with rice and fresh mango juice at the Statue restaurant (Palayam)" %}

That evening, a group of participants, including myself, attended a
sitar-and-drum recital at a nearby theatre, followed by a Kathakali dance
performance.

  {% include image.html url="20250719_183545.jpg"
     description="A concert featuring sitar and drums" %}

  {% include audio.html url="20250719_183545.m4a"
     description="A concert featuring sitar and drums" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250719_195454.jpg"
     description="A Kathakali dance performance" %}

# July 20: The third (and last) day of the conference

I woke up early and packed all my belongings for the 12 PM check-out at the
hotel.

At breakfast, Erik Nijenhuis, the vice-president of TUG, taught me the Dutch
word _Kaaskop_ (_cheese-head_). Apparently, some Dutch speakers, such as Erik,
use it to describe devoted cheese lovers, while non-Dutchers sometimes employ
it as a lighthearted insult toward the Dutch.

Before lunch, I snapped photos with several attendees, caught up with Honza
Vaněk and Thành about the latest news from our alma mater, and assisted
Jean-Michel Hufflen in porting LaTeX2e code to LaTeX3.

  {% include image.html url="20250720_091308.jpg"
     description="T. Rishikesan Nair speaks about beauty and purpose" %}

During the lunch, I spoke with Vrajaraja Govinda from [the International
Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON)][19] in Belagavi about the adoption
of GNU/Linux and (La)TeX in India and what can be done to spread awareness.

After lunch, the TUG Annual General Meeting convened under the chairmanship of
former TUG president and current board member Boris Veytsman. Financially, TUG
remains in the black, with its largest expenses devoted to printing the issues
of TUGboat and to accounting salaries. However, membership has been steadily
declining, and this year it dropped below the 1,000-member mark.

After the last session of talks, there was a calligraphic workshop by [Narayana
Bhattathiri][13].

  {% include image.html url="20250720_164936.jpg"
     description="Calligraphy by Narayana: “Letters are Beautiful” rendered in multiple scripts" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250720_165904.jpg"
     description="The name Frank Mittelbach, drawn by Narayana" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250720_171502.jpg"
     description="My GitHub handle, “witiko”, drawn by Narayana" %}

  {% include image.html url="20250720_180055.jpg"
     description="Thành's request: the Vietnamese text “Nhà khủng lồ” (“a giant house”)" %}

Shortly after the workshop, I said my goodbyes and left for the Trivandrum
airport.

  {% include image.html url="20250720_200822.jpg"
     description="Statues of a Kathakali dancer (top) and Nandi, the sacred vehicle of Lord Shiva" %}

I arrived in Prague early in the morning the next day.

# Parting thoughts

Attending the conference was an unforgettable experience. Not only did I make
lasting connections with fellow TeX enthusiasts, but I also had the joy of
exploring India for the very first time. Along the way, I collected valuable
bug reports for expltools, see issues [#109][20], [#110][21], and [#111][22].

My heartfelt thanks go to the sponsors, organizers, and every participant whose
passion and hard work brought this event to life. I'm especially grateful to
Honza Vaněk, Erik Nijenhuis, Ben Davies, Mathias Jakobsen, and [Julin S.][23]
for their camaraderie throughout the conference.

 [1]: https://tug.org/tug2025/
 [2]: https://ctan.org/pkg/expltools
 [3]: https://www.instagram.com/food_text_trivandrum/
 [4]: https://www.tug.org/tug2025/abstracts/jakobsen-parsing-editing.txt
 [5]: https://www.tug.org/tug2025/av/d3-t25-jakobsen-parsing-editing/d3-t25-jakobsen-parsing-editing-slides.pdf
 [6]: https://trivic.io/
 [7]: https://stmdocs.in/
 [8]: https://www.tug.org/tug2025/abstracts/starynovotny-expltools.txt
 [9]: https://www.tug.org/tug2025/av/d2-t11-starynovotny-expltools/d2-t11-starynovotny-expltools-slides.pdf
 [10]: https://tug.org.in/
 [11]: https://github.com/overleaf/overleaf/blob/0546fb72332a820dc5eb2754a2fd149aacc8fdc0/services/web/frontend/js/features/source-editor/lezer-latex/latex.grammar
 [12]: https://github.com/Witiko/expltools-tug25-paper/commit/b9b4ff95af27bb6281d1828da31367348b0b9239
 [13]: https://www.instagram.com/nbhattathiri/
 [14]: https://tug.org/tug2025/program.html
 [15]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eu_qM53tInw
 [16]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CRYYps0usiA
 [17]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ImCoKj_kLw4
 [18]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gR3F3GmK0lo
 [19]: https://www.iskcon.org/
 [20]: https://github.com/Witiko/expltools/issues/109
 [21]: https://github.com/Witiko/expltools/issues/110
 [22]: https://github.com/Witiko/expltools/issues/111
 [23]: https://github.com/ju-sh
 [24]: https://youtu.be/ImCoKj_kLw4?t=50m25s
